The present study aimed at investigating the weak cation magnetic separation technology and matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight-mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) in screening serum protein markers of osteopenia from ten postmenopausal women and ten postmenopausal women without osteopenia as control group, to find a new method for screening biomarkers and establishing a diagnostic model for primary type I osteoporosis.
Serum samples were collected from postmenopausal women with osteopenia and postmenopausal women with normal bone mass.
Proteins were extracted from serum samples by weak cation exchange magnetic beads technology, and mass spectra acquisition was done by MALDI-TOF-MS.
The visualization and comparison of data sets, statistical peak evaluation, model recognition, and discovery of biomarker candidates were handled by the proteinchip data analysis system software(ZJU-PDAS).
The diagnostic models were established using genetic arithmetic based support vector machine (SVM).
The SVM result with the highest Youden Index was selected as the model.
Combinatorial Peaks having the highest accuracy in distinguishing different samples were selected as potential biomarker.
From the two group serum samples, a total of 133 differential features were selected.
Ten features with significant intensity differences were screened.
In the pair-wise comparisons, processing of MALDI-TOF spectra resulted in the identification of ten differential features between postmenopausal women with osteopenia and postmenopausal women with normal bone mass.
The difference of features by Youden index showed that the highest features had a mass to charge ratio of 1699 and 3038 Da.
A diagnosis model was established with these two peaks as the candidate marker, and the specificity of the model is 100 %, the sensitivity was 90 % by leave-one-out cross validation test.
The two groups of specimens in SVM results on the scatter plot could be clearly distinguished.
The peak with m/z 3038 in the SVM model was suggested as Secretin by TagIdent tool.
To provide further validation, the secretin levels in serum were analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays that is a competitive inhibition enzyme immunoassay technique for the in vitro quantitative measurement of secretin in human serum.
