Microtubules are known as the most attractive molecular targets for anti-cancer drugs.
However, the number of serious limitations of the microtubule targeting agents (MTAs) including poor bioavailability, adverse effects (e.g., systemic and neural toxicity), and acquired resistance after initiation of MTA-based therapy remain the driving forces to develop the novel therapeutic agents effectively targeting microtubules and exhibiting potent anti-tumor activities.
Here, we report the discovery of 2-amino-pyrrole-carboxamides (2-APCAs), a novel class of MTA, which effectively inhibited the growth of the broad spectrum of cancer cell lines in vitro, including various types of breast, prostate, and non-small lung cancer (NSLC), soft tissue sarcomas (STS) (e.g., leio-, rhabdomyo-, and fibrosarcomas), osteosarcomas and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs).
Importantly, 2-APCAs were also effective in cancer cell lines exhibiting resistance to certain chemotherapeutic agents, including MTAs and topoisomerase II inhibitors.
The anti-proliferative effect of 2-APCAs was due to their ability to interfere with the polymerization of tubulin and thereby leading to the accumulation of tumor cells in the M-phase.
As an outcome of the mitotic arrest, cancer cells underwent apoptotic cell death which was evidenced by increased expression of cleaved forms of the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) and caspase-3 and the increased numbers of Annexin V-positive cells, as well.
Among the compounds exhibiting the potent anti-cancer activities against the various cancer cell lines indicated above, 2-APCA-III was found the most active.
Importantly, its cytotoxic activities correlated with its highest potency to interfere with the dynamics of tubulin polymerization and inducement of cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase.
Interestingly, the cytotoxic and tubulin polymerization activities of 2-APCAs correlated with the stability of the «tubulin-2-АРСА» complexes, illustrating the "tubulin-2-APCA-III" complex as the most stable.
Molecular docking showed that the binding site for 2-АРСА-III is located in α tubulin by forming a hydrogen bond with Leu23.
Of note, single-cell electrophoresis (Comet assay) data illustrated the low genotoxic activities of 2-APCAs when compared to certain anti-cancer chemotherapeutic agents.
Taken together, our study describes the novel MTAs with potent anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activities, thereby illustrating them as a scaffold for the development of successful chemotherapeutic anti-cancer agent targeting microtubules.
