To study and analyze the dynamics of stroke morbidity and mortality rates among men and women in the territories included in the Federal program for the reorganization of care for stroke patients.
The study was based on data from the territorial-population register of strokes.
The study included the following territories: Ivanovo region, Stavropol territory, the Republic of Bashkortostan, Sverdlovsk region, Irkutsk region, Sakhalin region, and the Republic of Tatarstan.
Research period was from 2009 to 2016.
A total of 29 779 stroke cases were analyzed.
The age of the examined people was 25 years and older.
In the study areas, a 2.2 - fold decrease in stroke mortality among men and a 3-fold decrease among women was found.
The values of morbidity and mortality from stroke over the entire study period were higher among men.
It was also revealed that in 2015-2016, the mortality rate was in a narrow range of values, which demonstrates the impact of comprehensive measures to reduce stroke mortality in all the studied territories.
The results of cluster analysis of stroke incidence rates obtained from seven territories over an 8-year period indicate similar measures for primary stroke prevention among men.
Among women, there are also similarities in primary stroke prevention measures, with the exception of two regions - the Stavropol territory (4.8 cases per 1000 population) and the Republic of Tatarstan (4.5 cases per 1000 population), where the highest values of the stroke incidence rate were found.
The results of cluster analysis of stroke mortality rates among men indicate a fairly large variation in the indicator values.
The dominant value of the stroke mortality rate among men was found in the Sakhalin region (1.61 per 1000 population).
The significance of stroke mortality rates among women in the regions was similar: six territories with similar levels of values were identified.
The exception was the Stavropol territory (2.48 cases per 1000 population), where the highest death rate from stroke was revealed.
