Approximately 2.4 million adults were estimated to have hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in the United States during 2013-2016 (1).
Untreated, hepatitis C can lead to advanced liver disease, liver cancer, and death (2).
The Viral Hepatitis National Strategic Plan for the United States calls for ≥80% of persons with hepatitis C to achieve viral clearance by 2030 (3).
Characterizing the steps that follow a person's progression from testing to viral clearance and subsequent infection (clearance cascade) is critical for monitoring progress toward national elimination goals.
Following CDC guidance (4), a simplified national laboratory results-based HCV five-step clearance cascade was developed using longitudinal data from a large national commercial laboratory throughout the decade since highly effective hepatitis C treatments became available.
During January 1, 2013-December 31, 2021, a total of 1,719,493 persons were identified as ever having been infected with HCV.
During January 1, 2013-December 31, 2022, 88% of those ever infected were classified as having received viral testing; among those who received viral testing, 69% were classified as having initial infection; among those with initial infection, 34% were classified as cured or cleared (treatment-induced or spontaneous); and among those persons, 7% were categorized as having persistent infection or reinfection.
Among the 1.0 million persons with evidence of initial infection, approximately one third had evidence of viral clearance (cured or cleared).
This simplified national HCV clearance cascade identifies substantial gaps in cure nearly a decade since highly effective direct-acting antiviral (DAA) agents became available and will facilitate the process of monitoring progress toward national elimination goals.
It is essential that increased access to diagnosis, treatment, and prevention services for persons with hepatitis C be addressed to prevent progression of disease and ongoing transmission and achieve national hepatitis C elimination goals.
