Hip fracture is common in older people - with prevalence even higher for people with dementia.
Research often excludes people with dementia - especially those in the more advanced stages.
Therefore, the most appropriate interventions remain unknown.
The main aim of this study was to gain consensus about the core considerations needed to deliver a physical intervention for people with advanced dementia who fracture their hip.
Materials and Methods: An expert consensus process was undertaken, using Nominal Group Technique, to explore the key considerations when delivering rehabilitation.
Data collection was undertaken in January 2023 and involved an online group discussion followed by voting and off-line rating.
Qualitative content analysis and quantitative analysis of consensus scoring was undertaken.
An international group of seven highly specialised physiotherapists took part.
59 statements were agreed following the process.
Content analysis was used to categorise these statements according to the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health.
Although consensus levels were high, there was disagreement in several areas.
The statements provide an overarching understanding of the multidisciplinary expertise that is needed to effectively deliver rehabilitation interventions to this population.
People with dementia require highly skilled and trained professionals, providing holistic and person-centred approaches to deliver rehabilitation interventions.
IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONThe expert consensus provides an overarching understanding of the multidisciplinary expertise that is needed to effectively deliver rehabilitation interventions to this population.
Physiotherapy - or other interventions - cannot be used in isolation.
People with dementia require highly skilled and trained professionals, providing holistic and person-centred approaches to deliver rehabilitation interventions.
While our focus was on hip fracture, we suggest these statements can be used for people with advanced dementia with a variety of other conditions.
