Altered gut microbiota has been connected to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) occurrence and advancement.
This study was conducted to identify a gut microbiota signature in differentiating between viral-related HCC (Viral-HCC) and non-hepatitis B-, non-hepatitis C-related HCC (NBNC-HCC).
Fecal specimens were obtained from 16 healthy controls, 33 patients with viral-HCC (17 and 16 cases with hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, respectively), and 18 patients with NBNC-HCC.
Compositions of fecal microbiota were assessed by 16S rRNA sequencing.
Bioinformatic analysis was performed by the DADA2 pipeline in the R program.
Significantly different genera from the top 50 relative abundance were used to classify between subgroups of HCC by the Random Forest algorithm.
Our data demonstrated that the HCC group had a significantly decreased alpha-diversity and changed microbial composition in comparison with healthy controls.
Within the top 50 relative abundance, there were 11 genera including Faecalibacterium, Agathobacter, and Coprococcus that were significantly enhanced in Viral-HCC, while 5 genera such as Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Parabacteroides, and Erysipelatoclostridium were enhanced in NBNC-HCC.
Compared to Viral-HCC, the NBNC-HCC subgroup significantly reduced various short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria, as well as declined fecal butyrate but elevated plasma surrogate markers of microbial translocation.
Based on the machine learning algorithm, a high diagnostic accuracy to classify HCC subgroups was achieved with an area under the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) of 0.94.
Collectively, these data revealed that gut dysbiosis was distinct according to etiological factors of HCC, which might play an essential role in hepatocarcinogenesis.
These findings underscore the possible use of a gut microbiota signature for the diagnosis and therapeutic approaches regarding different subgroups of HCC.
KEY POINTS: • Gut dysbiosis is connected to hepatocarcinogenesis and can be used as a novel biomarker.
Gut microbiota composition is significantly altered in different etiological factors of HCC.
• Microbiota-based signature can accurately distinguish between Viral-HCC and NBNC-HCC.
