Time is of the essence in how neural codes, synchronies, and oscillations might function in encoding, representation, transmission, integration, storage, and retrieval of information in brains.
This Hypothesis and Theory article examines observed and possible relations between codes, synchronies, oscillations, and types of neural networks they require.
Toward reverse-engineering informational functions in brains, prospective, alternative neural architectures incorporating principles from radio modulation and demodulation, active reverberant circuits, distributed content-addressable memory, signal-signal time-domain correlation and convolution operations, spike-correlation-based holography, and self-organizing, autoencoding anticipatory systems are outlined.
Synchronies and oscillations are thought to subserve many possible functions: sensation, perception, action, cognition, motivation, affect, memory, attention, anticipation, and imagination.
These include direct involvement in coding attributes of events and objects through phase-locking as well as characteristic patterns of spike latency and oscillatory response.
They are thought to be involved in segmentation and binding, working memory, attention, gating and routing of signals, temporal reset mechanisms, inter-regional coordination, time discretization, time-warping transformations, and support for temporal wave-interference based operations.
A high level, partial taxonomy of neural codes consists of channel, temporal pattern, and spike latency codes.
The functional roles of synchronies and oscillations in candidate neural codes, including oscillatory phase-offset codes, are outlined.
Various forms of multiplexing neural signals are considered: time-division, frequency-division, code-division, oscillatory-phase, synchronized channels, oscillatory hierarchies, polychronous ensembles.
An expandable, annotative neural spike train framework for encoding low- and high-level attributes of events and objects is proposed.
Coding schemes require appropriate neural architectures for their interpretation.
Time-delay, oscillatory, wave-interference, synfire chain, polychronous, and neural timing networks are discussed.
Some novel concepts for formulating an alternative, more time-centric theory of brain function are discussed.
As in radio communication systems, brains can be regarded as networks of dynamic, adaptive transceivers that broadcast and selectively receive multiplexed temporally-patterned pulse signals.
These signals enable complex signal interactions that select, reinforce, and bind common subpatterns and create emergent lower dimensional signals that propagate through spreading activation interference networks.
If memory traces share the same kind of temporal pattern forms as do active neuronal representations, then distributed, holograph-like content-addressable memories are made possible via temporal pattern resonances.
