This clinical study compared four different cases of extensive scalp malignancies treated by intensity-modulated radiation therapy.
The merits of coplanar and non-coplanar Step-and-shoot total scalp irradiation techniques were evaluated against the background of the literature.
Four patients (angiosarcoma, n=2, cutaneous B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, B-NHL, n=1, mycosis fungoides, n=1) treated between 2008 and 2012 at our institution were retrospectively analyzed.
For every patient with executed coplanar plan, a non-coplanar plan and vice versa has been calculated additionally for direct comparison.
Three patients underwent limited surgery before radiotherapy.
Individual adapted bolus material was used for every patient (helmet).
Total scalp dose was 30 Gy (B-NHL, mycosis fungoides) and 50 Gy (angiosarcoma) with fractional doses of 2.0-2.5 Gy (without sequential local boost in three patients).
Conformity and homogeneity indexes and dose volume histograms were used for treatment plan comparison.
Dose hot spots were higher in coplanar plans (110-128% Dmax).
Non-coplanar plans showed a more homogeneous dose distribution (HI = .12 - .17) and superior PTV coverage (88 - 96%).
Target dose coverage was 81-117% in non-coplanar and 30-128% in coplanar plans.
Coplanar plans yielded a stronger dose gradient across the target (.7-1.6 Gy/mm) compared to non-coplanar plans (.8-1.3 Gy/mm).
The most conformal plan was a non-coplanar plan (CI = .7).
Mean and maximum brain doses were comparable and showed an almost linear decrease between min. and max. dose.
The optic chiasm and brain stem was spared most with non-coplanar plans, mean doses to the lenses ranged between 4 and 8 Gy and were higher in non-coplanar plans as were doses to the optic nerves.
Radiotherapy tolerance was acceptable and acute side effects included erythema, scalp pain, alopecia and radiodermatitis which all spontaneously resolved.
Two patients accomplished partial response, two patients showed complete response after radiotherapy.
Three patients had locally controlled tumors without recurrence until their deaths or at last follow up, one patient had local progression shortly after radiotherapy.
Photon-IMRT is an effective and feasible approach to treat extensive scalp malignancies.
Non-coplanar beams could increase dose homogeneity and PTV coverage and might reduce doses particularly to the optic chiasm.
