One important concept associated with supramolecular chemistry is supramolecular self-assembly, which deals with the way discrete individual components interact via intermolecular interactions in order to build, upon their spontaneous association, high order functional assemblies.
The accumulation of these very simple and localized noncovalent interactions (such as H-bonding, dipole-dipole, hydrophobic/hydrophilic, van der Waals, π-π, π-CH, etc.) is ubiquitous in the complexity of natural systems (such as DNA, proteins, membranes, micelles, etc.).
It can also be transposed to the directed synthesis of intricate artificial scaffolds, which have anticipated geometries and properties.
Among the synthetic strategies based on this concept, coordination-driven supramolecular chemistry uses the robust, reversible, and directional metal-to-ligand coordinative bond to build discrete metallo-supramolecular architectures.
Within the last two decades, coordination-driven supramolecular chemistry has proved to be one of the most powerful contemporary synthetic approaches and has provided a significant number of increasingly complex supramolecular assemblies, which have predetermined sizes and geometries.
While much focus has been devoted to architectures bearing internal cavities for host-guest chemistry or to generate specific reactivity, particular attention can also be paid to compact supramolecular assemblies given that their specific structures are characterized by peculiar synthetic guiding rules as well as by alternative long-range self-assembling properties.
This Account describes how a preassembled CuI bimetallic clip bearing short intermetallic distances can be used as a U-shaped molecular clip to give general and versatile access to a large variety of original compact supramolecular metallacycles.
When this CuI precursor is reacted with various cyano-capped ditopic linkers that have increasing lengths and complexities, specific effects guiding the selective and straightforward syntheses of such compact supramolecular objects are highlighted.
Whereas a subtle compromise between the length of the ditopic linkers and the steric bulk of the molecular clip appears to be a purely stereogeometric preliminary parameter to master, lateral interlinker interactions (π-π stacking interactions or aurophilic interactions depending on the nature of the internal cores of the linkers) can circumvent these constraints regardless of the length of the linkers and allow the selective formation of new compact supramolecular structures.
Generally, such derivatives presented a strong tendency to self-assemble in the solid state due to inter-supramolecule interactions.
This approach thus opens a new door toward molecular materials having an attractive solid state structure for potential applications related to charge carrier mobility and luminescence properties.
These compact supramolecular assemblies can therefore be considered as original secondary binding units directing the predictive preparation of such extended networks.
The on-purpose design of original building blocks bearing specific cores allowed the formation of new compact supramolecular metallacycles such as "U-shaped" π-stacked assemblies or "pseudodouble paracyclophanes".
Similarly, the control of the secondary structure of one-dimensional coordination polymers alternating π-stacked compact supramolecular metallacycles was also conducted.
The results that are discussed in this Account illustrate how the rational design of both preassembled polymetallic precursors bearing short intermetallic distances and ditopic linkers able to induce cumulative lateral weak interactions can implement the general synthetic guiding rules of coordination driven supramolecular chemistry.
This opens perspectives to use such compact supramolecular assemblies as secondary building blocks for the design of long-range organized functional molecular materials that have predictable architectures and targeted properties.
