Long lasting insecticide treated nets (LLINs) have been advocated as an effective tool for prevention and control of malaria.
Olyset net was the first LLINs which became commercially available and obtained WHO approval.
According to the national strategic plan on evaluation of Olyset net, a field trial was conducted to determine the efficacy of these nets against malaria vectors in an endemic area in the southeast of Iran.
Fourteen villages with similar topographical and epidemiological situations were selected and randomly assigned to two clusters of the study: Olyset net and untreated net.
Distribution of nets was carried out to cover 100% of the population in Olyset net and untreated net cluster.
Anopheline mosquitoes were collected monthly using different WHO standard methods in both areas to determine their abundance, feeding pattern and resting behaviour.
Human blood index was determined using ELISA test.
Additionally, Olyset nets were evaluated for their biological activity using WHO cone bioassay test by susceptible colony of Anopheles stephensi (Beech strain) and then for insecticide residues by employing high performance thin layer chromatography.
Malaria incidence was measured by passive and active case detection from all study population.
In total 2115 adult anopheline mosquitoes were collected and identified using morphological characters.
Anopheles dthali (Liston), A. culicifacies (Giles), A. stephensi (Liston), A. superpictus (Grassi), A.fluviatilis (James), A. moghulensis (Christophers) and A. turkhudi (Liston).
A. dthali, A. culicifacies and A. stephensi were most prevalent species in both areas.
In the Olyset net study area, there was a significant reduction of 41.1%, 54.4%, 59.39% and 64.1% in the indoor-resting density of A. culicifacies, A. stephensi, A. dthali and A. superpictus, respectively, with an overall reduction of 39.3% in total mosquitoes in comparison with untreated net area.
A significant reduction was also observed in human blood index of vector species in the Olyset net villages.
Bioefficacy test results of Olyset nets showed that the median knockdown time was 1.48 and 3.25min, while the average mortality rate was 100% and 72.3%±7.07 in baseline and after 1 year of intervention, respectively.
The average permethrin content reached to 68.31% (683.1mg/m(2)) of the initial insecticide dose of 937±21.69mg/m(2) (nearly 1000mg/m(2))
Malaria incidence was reduced by 96.6% and 64.8% in the village with Olyset nets and in the villages with untreated nets, respectively.
During intervention period, there was a reduction of 93.2% in malaria incidence in Olyset net area as compared to the untreated area.
This study indicated that Olyset nets have a major impact on malaria vectors and disease burden; therefore it could be recommended as an effective personal protection tool for malaria control in malarious areas.
