Peripheral neuropathy is a neurological disorder characterised by pain, numbness, or tingling due to nerve damage.
Peripheral neuropathy is one of the main health issues in Kuwait and is a rising concern which affects a large proportion of the population, therefore the lived experience needs to be explored to identify areas for improvement in care.
This qualitative study explored the experiences of people living with peripheral neuropathy in Kuwait.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 25 participants recruited from the Neurology Outpatient Clinic of the Ibn Sina Hospital in Kuwait.
The interview questions explored their experiences and understanding of pain along with the impact on their daily life.
The interviews were audio recorded, transcribed and translated into English then coded using NVivo 12.
Thematic analysis was conducted to identify patterns and themes in the data.
Three major themes were identified including treatment beliefs (perceived effectiveness of treatment and seeking alternative treatments), the barriers to pain management (medication side effects, relationships with healthcare professionals and lack of information and access to healthcare), and the impact on quality of life (impact on work and social, physical, and psychological consequences).
Self-efficacy was a key construct and over-arching theme that was discussed in all aspects, which finds reflection in the protection motivation theory.
This paper presents the experiences of people living with peripheral neuropathy and highlights there is scope for improvement of current treatments in Kuwait.
Self-management strategies are recommended alongside prescribed medication and healthcare professionals are encouraged to use a patient-centered approach.
More importantly, information and support on the condition to promote coping strategies and self-efficacy should be adopted to improve quality of life.
These findings can be implemented locally and globally to improve the quality of care provided to people living with peripheral neuropathy.
