Primary care services in South Africa have been challenged by increasing numbers of people with communicable and non-communicable chronic diseases.
There was a need to develop alternative approaches for stable patients to access medication.
With the onset of the coronavirus pandemic there was an urgent need to decongest facilities and protect people from infection.
In this crisis the Metro Health Services rapidly implemented home delivery of medication by community health workers.
This study aimed to evaluate the implementation of home delivery of medication by community health workers during the coronavirus pandemic in Cape Town, South Africa.
A convergent mixed methods study evaluated six implementation outcomes: adoption, feasibility, fidelity, coverage, cost, and sustainability of the initiative.
Data sources included routinely collected data, a telephonic survey of 138 patients, an analysis of set-up and recurrent costs as well as 17 descriptive exploratory qualitative semi-structured interviews with 68 key informants.
Over a 6-month period 1,054,657 pre-packaged parcels were sent to primary care facilities, 819,649 (77.7%) were delivered and of those 97,297 (11.9%) returned.
The additional costs were estimated as 1.3% of a total health budget of R2,2 billion.
The initiative was rapidly adopted as it decongested facilities and protected vulnerable patients.
Although it was feasible to implement at scale, numerous challenges were encountered, such as incorrect addresses and contact details, transporting parcels, communicating with patients, having a reliable audit trail, and handling out-of-area patients.
All role players thought the service should continue and 42.3% of patients reported better adherence to their medication.
Home delivery of medication by community health workers is feasible at scale and affordable.
It should continue, but as one of a menu of options for alternative delivery of medication.
The following need to be improved: efficiency of the system, the audit trail, adequate support and resources for community health workers, transport of medication, communication with patients, empanelment of patients, governance of the system and training of the community health workers.
