Urethral stenosis is a complex pathology that severely affects the quality of life of patients who suffer it.
There are multiple therapeutic options, the main objective of which is to eliminate obstruction and improve symptoms, and consequently maintain or improve the quality of life of the patient.
The objective of this article is to perform a systematic review of the literature with the aim to evaluate the results regarding the sexual sphere after urethral surgery.
We performed a bibliographic search in PubMed, identifying studies that analyzed the results in sexual function after various types of urethroplasties.
Preference have been given to those articles evaluating sexual function both preoperative and postoperative, to determine the degree of involvement conditioned by surgery.
Fourteen articles have been selected, including those making reference to sexual function (sexual desire, erectile and ejaculatory function).
A total of 14 studies were selected to perform the analysis; they were divided into two groups depending of the perspective they have to evaluate results: Use of validated tests for data collection before and after surgery and a second group analyzing more qualitative features of the stenosis making the evaluation of results this way.
Site of stenosis is not uniformly distributed in these articles, with predominance of those performing anterior urethra surgery.
They have a comprehensive analysis of the various features that may affect directly or indirectly the result of the operation both in the short and long term.
Most articles conclude that specific standardized tools are necessary for this type of pathology, with the aim of obtain results that are more adjusted to urethral surgery.
Patient perception of the results of urethroplasty is a parameter that has gained great importance lately.
Globally the results of postoperative sexual function are very satisfactory, mainly in young patients.
It is important to globally analyze the results and surgical techniques currently in use with the aim to minimize deleterious effects on sexual function; moreover taking into account that the objective of surgery is to try to improve the patient's quality of life.
