Abernethy malformation is a rare congenital abnormality.
Imaging examination is an important method for the diagnosis.
The purpose of this study was to demonstrate manifestations of multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) in Abernethy malformation and its diagnostic accuracy.
Fourteen children with Abernethy malformation were admitted to our center in China between July 2011 and January 2018.
All 14 patients (eight males and six females) received MSCT and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) while eight patients also received ultrasound.
The patients' age ranged from 1 to 14 (median age 8 years old).
The clinical records of the patients were retrospectively reviewed.
MSCT raw data were transferred to an Advantage Windows 4.2 or 4.6 workstation (General Electric Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI).
We compared the findings of MSCT with DSA and surgical results in order to ascertain diagnostic accuracy.
Three cases had type Ib Abernethy malformation and eleven cases had type II.
Two cases of type II Abernethy malformation were misdiagnosed as type Ib using MSCT.
Comparing the findings of MSCT with DSA and surgical results, the accuracy of MSCT was 85.7% (12/14), in which 100.0% (3/3) were type Ib and 81.8% (9/11) were type II.
Clinical information included congenital heart disease, pulmonary hypertension, diffuse pulmonary arteriovenous fistula, abnormal liver function, hepatic nodules, elevated blood ammonia, and hepatic encephalopathy.
Eleven cases were treated after diagnosis.
One patient with Abernethy malformation type Ib (1/3) underwent liver transplantation.
Seven patients with Abernethy malformation type II (7/11) were treated by shunt occlusion, received laparoscopy, or were treated with open surgical ligation.
Another three patients (3/11) with Abernethy malformation type II were treated by interventional portocaval shunt occlusion under DSA.
MSCT attains excellent capability in diagnosing type II Abernethy malformation and further shows the location of the portocaval shunt.
DSA can help when it is hard to determine diagnosis between Abernethy type Ib and II using MSCT.
