IgA neutralizes pathogens to prevent infection at mucosal sites.
However, emerging evidence shows that IgA contributes to aggravating inflammation or dismantling antitumor immunity in human diseased liver.
The aim of this study was to elucidate the roles of inflammation-induced intrahepatic inflammatory IgA+ monocytes in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Patient cohorts including steatohepatitis cohort (n=61) and HCC cohort (n=271) were established.
Patients' surgical and biopsy specimens were analyzed using immunohistochemistry.
Multicolor flow cytometry was performed with a subset of patient samples.
Single-cell RNA-Seq analysis was performed using Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets.
Additionally, we performed in vitro differentiation of macrophages, stimulation with coated IgA, and RNA sequencing.
Hepa1-6 cells and C57BL/6N mice were used to obtain HCC syngeneic mouse models.
Serum IgA levels were associated (p<0.001) with fibrosis progression and HCC development in patients with chronic liver diseases.
Additionally, immunohistochemical staining of inflamed livers or HCC revealed IgA positivity in monocytes, with a correlation between IgA+ cell frequency and IgA serum levels.
Compared with IgA- monocytes, intrahepatic IgA+ monocytes expressed higher levels of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) in inflamed livers and in HCC tumor microenvironment.
Single-cell RNA sequencing using NCBI GEO database indicated an upregulation in inflammation-associated genes in the monocytes of patients whose plasma cell IGHA1 expression was greater than or equal to the median value.
Bulk RNA sequencing demonstrated that in vitro stimulation of M2-polarized macrophages using coated IgA complex induced PD-L1 upregulation via YAP-mediated signaling.
In vivo blockade of IgA signaling decreased the number of tumor-infiltrating IgA+PD-L1high macrophages and increased the number of CD69+CD8+ T cells to enhance antitumor effects in HCC mice models.
Overall, the findings of this study showed that serum IgA levels was correlated with intrahepatic and intratumoral infiltration of inflammatory IgA+PD-L1high monocytes in chronic liver diseases and HCC, providing potential therapeutic targets.
