There is a growing body of research on local retail food environments globally in both urban and rural settings.
Despite this, little research has been conducted on adult food choices, local retail environments, and healthy food access in resource-poor communities.
The purpose of this study is therefore to provide an overview of the evidence on adult food choices (measured as dietary intake) in association with the local retail food environment and food access in resource-poor communities (defined as low-income communities and/or households).
We searched nine databases for studies published from July 2005 to March 2022 and identified 2426 records in the primary and updated search.
Observational studies, empirical and theoretical studies, focused on adults ≤ 65 years, published in English peer-reviewed journals, examining local retail food environments and food access, were included.
Two independent reviewers screened identified articles using the selection criteria and data extraction form.
Study characteristics and findings were summarized for all studies and relevant themes summarized for qualitative and mixed methods studies.
A total of 47 studies were included in this review.
Most studies were cross sectional (93.6%) and conducted in the United States of America (70%).
Nineteen (40.4%) studies assessed the association between food choice outcomes and local retail food environment exposures, and evidence on these associations are inconclusive.
Associations of certain food choice outcomes with healthy food retail environments were positive for healthy foods (in 11 studies) and unhealthy foods (in 3 studies).
Associations of certain food choice outcomes with unhealthy retail food environment exposures were positive for unhealthy foods in 1 study and negative for healthy foods in 3 studies.
In 9 studies, some of the food choice outcomes were not associated with retail food environment exposures.
A healthy food store type and lower food prices were found to be major facilitators for healthy food access in resource-poor communities, while cost and transportation were the main barriers.
More research is needed on the local retail food environment in communities in low- and middle-income countries to develop better interventions to improve food choices and access to healthy foods in resource-poor communities.
