In the present study, we aimed to compare postprandial 90 minute measurements and postprandial 1 hour (PP1-HR) measurements for prediction of foetal growth disturbances and pregnancy complications.
This was a prospective study conducted in Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University Altunizade Hospital in Department of Perinatology.
The study group consisted of patients diagnosed with gestational diabetes.
In each antepartum visit, the patients fasting plasma glucose as well as PP1-HR and 90 minute measurements were made.
Perinatal and neonatal data were obtained from each patient.
The rate of large for gestational age infants was increased in patients when either PP1-HR measurement above 140 mg/dl or postprandial 90 minute measurement above 165 mg/dl compared to patients with normal PP1-HR or postprandial 90 minute measurement.
Preterm delivery rate was increased in patients with postprandial 90 minute measurement above 165 mg/dl but not in patients with PP1-HR measurement above 140 mg/dl.
The optimal cut-off for postprandial 90 minute measurement was 165 mg/dl based on receiver operating characteristics curve.
Our preliminary data show that postprandial 90 minute measurements are superior to PP1-HR measurements in predicting large for gestational age infants.
Impact StatementWhat is already known on this subject?
Gestational diabetes (GDM) is defined as any degree of glucose intolerance with onset or first recognition in pregnancy.
Maternal hyperglycaemia has been linked to metabolic alterations in the foetus and thus brings about foetal macrosomia as well as other pregnancy complications such as preterm delivery and preeclampsia.
What the results of this study add?
The findings of the present study suggest that postprandial 90 minute predicted more cases of LGA infants than postprandial 1-hour (PP1-HR) measurements.
In addition, the rate of preterm deliveries was found to be increased in patients with mean postprandial 90 minute measurements above 165 mg/dl compared to patients with postprandial 90 minute measurements below 165 mg/dl.
However, the rate of preterm deliveries was similar in patients with elevated PP1-HR measurements and patients with normal PP1-HR measurements.
What the implications are of these findings for clinical practice and/or further research?
Our study is the first to investigate the usefulness of postprandial 90 minute in a prospective design.
Our preliminary data show that postprandial 90 minute measurements are superior to PP 1 measurements in predicting LGA babies.
It also correlates better with preterm deliveries.
