The World Health Organization has defined quality of life as "the perception of an individual, his/her place in life, in the context of the culture and the system of values in which he/she lives and in relation to his/her objectives, expectations, standards and concerns".
The quality of life of the schizophrenic patients has been largely studied for the evaluation of their medical, social and therapeutic needs.
The impact of neuroleptics, in particular atypical neuroleptics, on the subjective quality of life of these patients remains to be specified.
The aim of this study was to compare the subjective quality of life of schizophrenic patients treated with classical neuroleptics (CN) or atypical neuroleptics (AN).
One hundred patients meeting DSM IV criteria for the diagnosis of schizophrenia (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) were included in the study.
Sixty-four schizophrenic patients were treated with CN and thirty-six with AN.
The symptomatology of the patients was assessed using the Positive And Negative Syndrome Scale, (PANSS, Kay et al., 1987) and the Schedule for the Deficit Syndrome (SDS, Kirkpatrick et al., 1989).
The extra-pyramidal symptoms were assessed using the Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (Chouinard et al., 1980).
The Subjective quality of life was studied using the Lehman Quality of Life Interview (QOLI, Lehman, 1988) translated and validated in France.
The patients treated by CN did not differ from the patients treated by AN in terms of severity of the positive and negative symptoms.
The patients treated with AN presented significantly less extrapyramidal side effects than the patients treated with CN.
No significant difference in terms of quality of life was found between both groups of patients.
The kind of neuroleptic (CN vs AC) does not seem to influence the quality of subjective life of schizophrenic patients.
Y: Positive And Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS), Schedule for the Deficit Syndrome (SDS), Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale, Lehman Quality of Life Interview (QOLI) (No need to annotate, just for notice).
