The United States Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension Registry (US-CTEPH-R) was designed to characterize the demographic characteristics, evaluation, clinical course, and outcomes of surgical and nonsurgical therapies for patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension.
What are the differences in baseline characteristics and 1-year outcomes between operated and nonoperated subjects?
This study describes a multicenter, prospective, longitudinal, observational registry of patients newly diagnosed (< 6 months) with CTEPH.
Hg documented by right heart catheterization and radiologic confirmation of CTEPH.
Between 2015 and 2018, a total of 750 patients were enrolled and followed up biannually until 2019.
Most patients with CTEPH (87.9%) reported a history of acute pulmonary embolism.
CTEPH diagnosis delays were frequent (median, 10 months), and most patients reported World Health Organization functional class 3 status at enrollment with a median mean pulmonary artery pressure of 44 mm Hg.
The registry cohort was subdivided into Operable patients undergoing pulmonary thromboendarterectomy (PTE) surgery (n = 566), Operable patients who did not undergo surgery (n = 88), and those who were Inoperable (n = 96).
Inoperable patients were older than Operated patients; less likely to be obese; have a DVT history, non-type O blood group, or thrombophilia; and more likely to have COPD or a history of cancer.
PTE resulted in a median pulmonary vascular resistance decline from 6.9 to 2.6 Wood units (P < .001) with a 3.9% in-hospital mortality.
At 1-year follow-up, Operated patients were less likely treated with oxygen, diuretics, or pulmonary hypertension-targeted therapy compared with Inoperable patients.
A larger percentage of Operated patients were World Health Organization functional class 1 or 2 at 1 year (82.9%) compared with the Inoperable (48.2%) and Operable/No Surgery (56%) groups (P < .001).
Differences exist in the clinical characteristics between patients who exhibited operable CTEPH and those who were inoperable, with the most favorable 1-year outcomes in those who underwent PTE surgery.
Y: United States Chronic Thromboembolic Pulmonary Hypertension Registry (US-CTEPH-R) (No need to annotate, just for notice).
