Acer truncatum Bunge is a multifunctional plant in northern China.
It has traditionally been used to prevent cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases and treat skin trauma by different linguistic groups including Mongolian, Tibetan, and Korean.
Although research has verified that A. truncatum contains a variety of active ingredients, especially nervonic acid, an important component in delaying brain aging, to date no review has been made to compile its traditional use, phytochemistry, and pharmacology.
This review aimed to update the traditional uses, phytochemistry, and pharmacology of A. truncatum, which expect to provide theoretical support for the future utilization as well as highlight the further investigation of this important plant.
The ethnobotanical, phytochemical, and pharmacological information related to A. truncatum from 1949 to March 2021 were collated by surveying the traditional medicinal books and ethnomedicinal publications and searching the online databases including Google Scholar, Sci Finder, Web of Science, Springer Link, PubMed, Wiley, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Baidu Scholar, and Wan Fang Database.
A. truncatum has traditionally been used for medicinal, edible and ornamental purposes in northern China for many centuries.
Different parts of the plant including leaves, fruits and bark, are mainly used as herbal medicine to treat hyperpiesia, hyperlipidemia, bruises, back pain, etc.
A total of 288 compounds in A. truncatum, including polyphenols, organic acids or lipids, and biological volatile organic compounds were isolated or identified by phytochemical studies.
Pharmacological research showed that A. truncatum has various bioactivities such as acetylcholinesterase inhibition, antibacterial, antioxidant, antitumor, and fatty acid synthase inhibition effects.
A. truncatum has been used as a traditional herbal medicine for centuries in northern China.
Polyphenols, organic acids, lipids and other compounds were isolated or identified from different parts of the plant.
Most of the pharmacological activities of A. truncatum have been reported, which showed its potential in the development of new drugs or nutraceuticals.
However, detailed information on the molecular mechanisms, metabolic activity, and toxicology of active components is limited.
Further comprehensive research to evaluate the medicinal properties of A. truncatum will be necessary.
Y and Google Scholar, Sci Finder, Web of Science, Springer Link, PubMed, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Baidu Scholar, Wan Fang Database (No need to annotate, just for notice).
