This study was planned to investigate the anti-arthritic property of flowers of E. crassipes in a Sprague-Dawley rat model by administering Freund's Complete Adjuvant (FCA).
Materials and Methods: Arthritis was induced at day 0 in all rats except negative controls, while arthritic progress and paw edema were analyzed on specific days (8th, 13th, 18th, and 23rd) via the macroscopic arthritic scale and a digital Vernier caliper, respectively.
Histopathological parameters were examined using a Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining method.
Blood samples were withdrawn from rats to investigate the effects of the E. crassipes flower on the mRNA expression values of inflammatory markers, via a reverse transcription PCR technique.
Serum samples were used to determine prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Values of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), creatinine, and urea, besides hematological parameters, i.e., the hemoglobin (Hb) content and complete blood count (CBC), were investigated.
The data showed that E. crassipes inhibited the arthritic progress and ameliorated the paw edema.
The amelioration of parameters assessed via the histopathological analysis of ankle joints, as well as via hematological analysis, confirmed the diminution of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in the plant-treated groups.
Treatment with E. crassipes inhibited the expression levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukins (IL-1β and IL-6), nuclear factor KappaB (NF-κB), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-2 and MMP-3), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Serum PGE2 levels were also found to be reduced in treatment groups.
A biochemical investigation revealed the improvements in hepatic markers in plant-treated groups.
The data indicated that the plant has no hepatotoxic or nephrotoxic effects at the studied dose.
GC-MS (Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry) analysis displayed the presence of phytochemicals having known anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties.
Therefore, it may be concluded that E. crassipes possesses anti-arthritic characteristics that could be attributed to the modulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, MMPs, and PGE2 levels.
