Osteoporosis develops because of an age-dependent imbalance between the rates of bone formation and bone resorption (i.e. bone formation rate is inadequate compared with bone resorption rate to maintain bone volume).
With regard to the mechanism for the deficiency in bone formation, we propose that age-associated changes in the IGF system components contribute to an age-related decrease in the skeletal capacity for osteoblast cell proliferation.
As a means of testing this hypothesis, we have measured serum levels of IGFBP-4 and IGFBP-5 since our studies have shown that the mitogenic actions of IGFs in bone cells are modulated by inhibitory IGFBP-4 and stimulatory IGFBP-5.
By using newly developed and validated radioimmunoassays for measurement of IGFBP-4 and IGFBP-5, we found that the circulating level of IGFBP-4 increases with age while that of IGFBP-5 declines with age.
In subjects from 23-87 years, serum IGFBP-4 concentrations showed a significant positive correlation with serum PTH while serum IGFBP-5 concentrations showed a significant positive correlation with IGF-I. These age-related changes in the serum levels of IGF system components are consistent with our previous findings of age-related decreases in the femoral cortical contents of IGF-I, IGF-II and IGFBP-5.
Although the biological implications of the sequestration of IGFs in bone are unknown, we have hypothesized that the level of the IGFs in bone is a reflection of their integrated local secretion by osteoblasts.
Based on our data, we now propose a model in which (a) underproduction of the stimulatory components and overproduction of an inhibitory component of the IGF system occur as a consequence of aging, and (b) these changes lead to an age-related decrease in the local (autocrine/paracrine) as well as the hormonal (endocrine) actions of the IGFs, which in aggregate could contribute to the decrease in osteoblast proliferation and the deficiency in bone formation.
In conclusion, although our findings provide indirect evidence that age associated changes in IGF system components could lead to a deficit in bone formation, further studies are needed to demonstrate a cause and effect relationship between changes in bone cell production of IGF system components and the age-related uncoupling of bone formation from resorption.
