Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system that leads to neurological impairment and disability, mostly in young-aged people.
Depression and anxiety are important associated mental disorders for people with MS (PwMS), which influence their life quality.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, fear and stress levels enhanced dramatically for the general population, but mostly in progressive chronic pathologies such as MS.
This study aimed to analyze the dynamic of psychological aspects in PwMS pre-pandemic and during pandemic, their connection with clinical outcomes, and with the coronavirus disease.
We included 95 PwMS with relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) and secondary progressive MS (SPMS), who were first evaluated 4 years before the pandemic outbreak and the second time 2 years after.
They completed a series of psychological tests for depression, anxiety, negative automatic thoughts, and stress: Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II), Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Endler Multidimensional Anxiety Scales (EMAS), Automatic Thoughts Questionnaire (ATQ).
A neurologist evaluated the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) and a COVID-19 survey was completed by 78 patients.
During the pandemic, depression was encountered in 9.47% of PwMS, only 1.05% with a severe form, and 6.3% with suicidal thoughts, while anxiety was more frequent (39% of cases).
Compared to the pre-pandemic period, depression levels remained stable over time (p = 0.55), anxiety was reduced (p<0.001), and stress levels significantly increased (p = 0.001).
Some social aspects, such as having sufficient income, reduced the risk for psychological comorbidities.
There was a mild correlation between emotional well-being and neurological disability.
Of all patients who responded to the survey, 53.84% had previous COVID-19 infections, no patient was hospitalized and 69.23% were vaccinated.
There was no relationship between the COVID-19 infection and psychological test results.
During the pandemic, in the MS population depression remained stable, anxiety decreased, and stress levels were enhanced compared to the pre-pandemic period.
Psychiatric comorbidities were not influenced by the coronavirus infection.
