Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with impaired sleep quality and autonomic dysfunction.
Adenotonsillectomy significantly improves subjective and objective sleep quality in children with OSA.
However, the postoperative changes in heart rate variability (HRV) indices (indicators of cardiac autonomic function) and their importance remain inconclusive in childhood OSA.
This retrospective case series aimed to investigate the association of sleep HRV indices, total OSA-18 questionnaire score (a subjective indicator of sleep quality) and polysomnographic parameters (objective indicators of sleep quality), and effects of adenotonsillectomy on HRV indices, total OSA-18 questionnaire score and polysomnographic parameters in children with OSA.
Seventy-six children with OSA were included in baseline analysis, of whom 64 (84%) completed at least 3 months follow-up examinations after adenotonsillectomy and were included in outcome analysis.
Associations between baseline variables, and relationships with treatment-related changes were examined.
Multivariable linear regression models in the baseline analysis revealed independent relationships between tonsil size and obstructive apnea-hypopnea index (OAHI), adenoidal-nasopharyngeal ratio and very low frequency (VLF) power of HRV (an indicator of sympathetic activity), and normalized low frequency power (an indicator of sympathetic activity) and OAHI.
The outcome analysis showed that adenotonsillectomy significantly improved standard deviation of all normal-to-normal intervals, and high frequency power, QoL (in terms of reduced total OSA-18 questionnaire score), OAHI and hypoxemia.
Using a conceptual serial multiple mediation model, % change in OSA-18 questionnaire score and % change in VLF power serially mediated the relationships between change in tonsil size and % change in OAHI.
The improvement in OAHI after adenotonsillectomy was serially mediated by reductions in total OSA-18 questionnaire score and VLF power.
These preliminary findings are novel and provide a direction for future research to investigate the effects of VLF power-guided interventions on childhood OSA.
