Performing in a social context can result in negative feelings when our actions harm another person, but it can also lead to positive feelings when observing an opponent fail.
The extent to which individuals scoring high on psychopathic traits, often characterized as self-centered with reduced concern for others' welfare, are sensitive to own and others' success and failure is yet unknown.
However, knowledge about these processes is crucial for comprehending how these traits are involved in understanding ourselves and others during social interactions.
In this functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, healthy females scoring low or high on psychopathic traits performed a cannon-shooting game in non-social, cooperative, and competitive contexts.
We hypothesized group differences regarding: (1) monitoring of own actions in a non-social context (errors that only negatively affect oneself) versus cooperative context (errors that also harm others), (2) successfully performing with either positive (shared gain) or negative consequences (selfish gain) for the co-player, and (3) observing other's performance leading to shared or selfish gain for oneself.
Decreased performance-monitoring-related activations were found in posterior medial frontal cortex for females scoring high on psychopathic traits in the social versus non-social context.
When observing others, striatal activations were stronger for selfish gains for high scorers and for shared gains for low scorers.
The current outcomes demonstrate that performance-monitoring and reward-related brain activations importantly depend on the interplay between psychopathic traits and social context.
We propose that these neural mechanisms may underlie the more self-centered behavior of individuals scoring high on psychopathic traits.
As such, the current findings may open up new research avenues, which could advance our understanding of how personality traits impact performance monitoring in a wide variety of social contexts and could possibly lead to the development of interventions aimed at normalizing reduced concern for others.
