Investigating ecology of marine animals imposes a continuous challenge due to their temporal and/or spatial unavailability.
Light-based geolocators (GLS) are animal-borne devices that provide relatively cheap and efficient method to track seabird movement and are commonly used to study migration.
Here, we explore the potential of GLS data to establish individual behavior during the breeding period in a rock crevice-nesting seabird, the Little Auk, Alle alle.
By deploying GLS on 12 breeding pairs, we developed a methodological workflow to extract birds' behavior from GLS data (nest attendance, colony attendance, and foraging activity), and validated its accuracy using behavior extracted from a well-established method based on video recordings.
We also compared breeding outcome, as well as behavioral patterns of logged individuals with a control group treated similarly in all aspects except for the deployment of a logger, to assess short-term logger effects on fitness and behavior.
We found a high accuracy of GLS-established behavioral patterns, especially during the incubation and early chick rearing period (when birds spend relatively long time in the nest).
We observed no apparent effect of logger deployment on breeding outcome of logged pairs, but recorded some behavioral changes in logged individuals (longer incubation bouts and shorter foraging trips).
Our study provides a useful framework for establishing behavioral patterns (nest attendance and foraging) of a crevice-nesting seabird from GLS data (light and conductivity), especially during incubation and early chick rearing period.
Given that GLS deployment does not seem to affect the breeding outcome of logged individuals but does affect fine-scale behavior, our framework is likely to be applicable to a variety of crevice/burrow nesting seabirds, even though precautions should be taken to reduce deployment effect.
Finally, because each species may have its own behavioral and ecological specificity, we recommend performing a pilot study before implementing the method in a new study system.
