Trauma-specific performance improvement (PI) activities are highly variable among Emergency Medical Services (EMS) providers.
This study assesses the perception of the trauma PI activities of EMS providers in the state of Ohio and identifies potential barriers to conducting a successful program.
An institutional review board-approved, voluntary, and anonymous Qualtrics survey was disseminated to all EMS agencies registered under the Ohio Department of Public Safety throughout the 88 counties of Ohio.
It included questions regarding what agencies considered trauma-specific PI activities, how frequently they completed those activities, and barriers related to conducting such PI activities.
There were both open-ended and closed-ended questions in the survey, along with a follow-up interview.
The data were descriptively and thematically analyzed.
From the recorded responses (341), most the respondents (98.5%) either agreed or strongly agreed that trauma-specific PI activities improve performance of EMS providers, while only 63.8% (218) of the agencies performed them.
Some activities considered as trauma PI and conducted at least once a month included (1) record keeping (74.6%), (2) confirmation on the use of correct triage protocols (66.9%), (3) measuring response time on trauma calls (60.0%), (4) PI reviews of trauma cases (56.9%), and (5) obtaining feedback from the receiving facility and or authorizing physicians (48.5%).
Primary barriers to performing trauma PI activities included a lack of interest and financial resources, followed by system-level reasons such as unavailability of training centers and a lack of regional/state support.
Thematic analysis of the data suggested that improved communication and awareness of trauma PI, sharing statewide data on trauma PI, better synchronization among EMS agencies and trauma centers, and enhanced EMS funding could potentially improve trauma-specific PI programs at the EMS level.
Our results showed variability in the perception, execution, and availability of trauma-specific PI activities among EMS agencies in the state.
Common barriers could potentially be mitigated by collaboration between agencies, trauma centers, and state-led initiatives.
With the increased frequency of mass shootings and other large-scale trauma disasters, it is imperative from a state and regional level to address these inconsistencies and further elucidate effective measures of trauma PI for the EMS community.
