Efforts to control agricultural injuries have been underway for years.
Yet, very little is known about their trends over time.
We examined trends in non-fatal agricultural injuries through analyzing injuries reported in a state trauma registry.
Using Iowa Trauma Registry data collected by the Iowa Department of Public Health, we examined trends in non-fatal agricultural injuries reported by acute care hospitals accredited as Level I, II, and III Trauma Care Facilities from 2005 to 2013.
Rate ratios and corresponding 95 % confidence intervals were used to examine the burden of non-fatal agricultural injuries across this period.
Negative binomial regression was used to calculate the average annual change in agricultural injury rates over time.
Joinpoint regression analysis was used to examine the average annual change in the number of injuries over time.
Between 2005 and 2013, a total of 1238 agricultural injuries were reported to the trauma registry by Level I, II and III trauma facilities.
From 2005 to 2013, the rate of agricultural injuries per 100,000 hired workers, ranchers, and farm operators increased by 11 % for every unit increase in year and had nearly tripled over this time period.
From 2005 to 2008 there was a significant annual increase of 31.74 % in the number of agricultural injuries whereas from 2008 to 2013 there was a non-significant annual increase of 3.70 %.
The number of moderate and severe/critical injuries increased steadily and significantly over the study period, with annual percent increases of 13 and 20 %, respectively.
Non-fatal agricultural injuries are rising, although the documented increases could be influenced in some part by treatment patterns in the trauma system, reporting bias or increases in farm work exposure.
However, these issues do not likely account for all of the increase found, and this calls for an increase in priority of agricultural safety programs.
Since the majority of research involves fatal injuries, information about non-fatal injuries may help inform new intervention approaches.
